# Japanese immigrants
1895-1910 biggest wave of Japanese immigrants
in japan, the industrial revolution is called the meiji restoration.
the rising power of industrialists in japan caused a huge wave of japanese immigrants to america.
the japanese who left japan to america left because of **land**.
private land ownership in japan is super hard. (even if you were wealthy its still hard to get land)

the naturalization act prevented Chinese from becoming citizens. 
Californias started to push the government to apply the same restrictions to japanese people too
the federal govt wouldnt give in

most people from Japan come in with money and a plan.
they intend to live in America.

they start passing laws that sound like they try to restrict the japanese, but it has many loop holes.

those are called **Paper Tigers**

theyre a way to keep hotheads against japanese pacified, while keeping japanese people their freedoms.

Japanese went to white schools.

## Executive Order 9066
japanese are rounded up during ww2 and put into internment camps during the war.

75% of the japanese that were rounded up were american citizens.
after the war, they find that their stuff and land has been stripped away.

in 1898, the US and Spain went into war and the US won.
all the people in the phillipines are now officially americans.
technically legally the philippines is an american territory.
fillipinos are now moving onto mainland america.
they typically moved to central valley areas.

filipinos face discrimination but not limitation.


# native americans

"America for Real Americans"
nativism has a funny connotation with native americans.

the europeans when they first started coming to america, they had an "indian problem"
they did seperation. over time as the colonies grew, they slowly pushed the line.
when the united states takes over, that goes away and had a vision of a continental government.
