And the rule that they came up with was what? what did that court case establish as a rule good separate so how does but equal okay the legitimization of segregation for roughly half a century and actually even after the Supreme Court decision that comes along the Benz it segregation will still continue for quite a while before the Civil Rights era really starts breaking it apart segregation start falling what is the reason for the rise of the Civil Rights Movement answer: World War 2. That segregation starts being challenged as an idea part of it was that during World War II we had segregated troops and the idea there was that well the soldiers will feel better being with their own kind but the implication was the white units or the elite ones in the color units are the ones that are sort of the B team compared and that was kind of the unspoken perception within the military however some groups are going to come along that really challenge those ideas and bring the Forefront the way many of the different segregated units are truly excelling and becoming the class of the military one group that was formed during the war that wanted to challenge some of the assumptions and norms was a group called the 99% Squadron more commonly they are known as the 

##tuskegee airmen

African Americans were banned from flying war planes. And the reason that they gave was the scientific studies and that's in quotes of many universities suggested that blacks had smaller blood vessels in their brains which meant that in the High aerial maneuvers that planes go through they would be likely to pass out and lose control of the plane and crashes die and of course we know today that that's complete bs but that was largely believed by many people. to combat this, they created a pilot program pilot not as in flying the plane but that's exactly what they'll do but pilot program is in a test set and that program was to test the feasibility of African Americans flying warplanes so they created a squad and the 99% Squadron went through all the training and we're waiting to be deployed but Southern politicians had blocked their entrance into the war fearing that they might just well succeed and what will that mean to the future of the military so they had managed to block it up to a point however civil rights had a champion in the White House and it was not the president Eleanor Roosevelt was a major proponent of civil rights she hated segregation she did not like the policies of the New Deal during the 1930s excluding blacks from a lot of them and because of her activism with her husband got him to realize oh yeah they need to be taken care of too let's close some of those gaps and open up programs to people of other races not just White and so she was instrumental in that 

## Eleanor Roosevelt and "Chief" Anderson

and then once the war starts she's the one saying this kind of discrimination needs to come to an end and she wanted to combat it she saw the Tuskegee Airmen having gone through their training we're ready to be deployed but we're not being deployed and so she decided to pay an official visit up around the field with one of the air and here you see her in the backseat at the Airman up front that was the guy who flew her around this photo ran in Life Magazine which of the time was the biggest publication in the US shortly after this this photo went public the 99% Squadron was deployed now they were deployed to North Africa and they were assigned behind the line missions largely involving dive bombing runs and the politicians back in the States commented on how ineffective the 99% Squadron was because they didn't shoot any enemies down. While they're being used for dive bomb. How many air enemies are they getting countering in North Africa? Not many. So basically the leaders of not just the 99 but the growing group of aviators being trained starts protesting hey give us a real job you want to see how we fight in combat don't keep us behind the lines hitting ground targets give us something real and so they did. In Europe, the Air corps has been bombing Germany and they had been doing so a great expense on avg most of the bomb runs resulted in a 30% loss of airships in other words one out of three does not come home every time they go up those are ugly numbers and you know it's bad enough having one mission where you lose a third of your bombers but every time they go up and they said what's going on well the commander of the new Air Group which combines several squadrons they became the 332nd Air Group figured it out he said the white Pilots have been told when you encountered German planes go after him and shoot him down but what's happening is the Germans are pulling them off and then another group of Germans will come in from the other side and attack the planes without opposition and that's how they were losing their planes so he said the whites won't change the way they're fighting we will we stick with the bombers and if the Germans want to turn tail and run let them if they come back hit him again. Stick with the bombers like you're tied with the string. And they start doing this and lo and behold once the tusky year men take over bomber defence they don't lose a single bomber to enemy action not one the white units were losing 1/3 they didn't lose any. Their approach affected the rest of the airport and how the rest of the pilots will defend the bombers because of their overwhelming success there are other groups who are distinguishing themselves as well. Arguably the greatest tank commander to come out of World War II and probably the greatest in history with the possible exception of Rommel was George Patton. General Patton was famous especially for a tank maneuver that he did during the Battle of the Bulge which is really the largest battle in the history of the world. Huge numbers of people over a million people were engaged in that battle it was big. And ultimately he ended up taking his Armored Division through a raging blizzard the worst one they had seen in years. 24 straight hours for the first pet everybody thought that they'd stop after that he doesn't he keeps them going for 48 straight hours constantly in combat in the middle of this blizzard any stages of breakthrough in the German lines in doing so one particular tank group within his division a tank Battalion called the 761st tank Battalion otherwise known as the Black Panthers was it the spearhead of this. And he says hey people can complain all they want give me all the color boys you can I love them. These guys know how to fight. And they are excelling the Black Panthers kill more and lose less than any other tank Battalion under any Commander's command at that point. That's how effective they were. These guys were great. Now another interesting thing is a side note that comes out of that. one of the officers within the 761st tank battalion was a man named John Robinson otherwise known as Jackie Robinson

## John "Jackie" Robinson

after the war is over he goes back to his original career baseball and he is so good that he becomes the first African American signed to a major league baseball team to play in a game he signed with the Brooklyn Dodgers and he basically was the best player in baseball or it certainly top three Jackie Robinson will break the color line in Major League Baseball others are breaking the color line in other ways but one thing is constant throughout this: segregation is starting to Chip Away. Another group that was significant was the 442 regimental combat team who were they? Japanese Americans. While their families were being interned in camps back in the United States they were saying hey America's my country too and I'm wanting to fight for it and a whole bunch of other Japanese with them for saying we do too and so they formed a Japanese group and they sent them to Germany that group was the most heavily decorated group in the entire us command more Medals of Honor were given to the Japanese 442nd than any other unit in the United States. That's how good they were. And then there comes the first real desegregation that you see and it was out of necessity. the Marines down in the South Pacific, as they were fighting the Japanese, had a problem and the problem was the Japanese had broken all of their Battlefield codes which meant they didn't have secure Communications on the battlefield. As a result as soon as the Americans send out a message oh we're going to do this the Japanese are listening to it knowing exactly what they're going to do and they are able to shift their fire. The Marines were taking huge losses because of this. and so they say well we need to come up with a better code so who did they turn to? Native Americans.

## Navajo Code-Talker

Specifically the DNA people otherwise known as the Navajo they turn to people who could speak native Navajo language as well as English both fluently that was key you had to be able to speak both of them and they used the language to create a code and in order for it to work there had to be a Navajo code talker put with every single unit so that they can communicate securely now when these guys first show up the white units are going oh man you got to be kidding. We're the ones who get the racial policies we're the ones are getting desegregated. And they resented them. That ended after the very first battle. The first battle they saw just how many people these guys were saving. And as a result not only will they not protest them anymore they will fight to protect them. They will do everything in their power to protect them because they know that these guys are keeping them alive. Overwhelmingly successful the Japanese never broke that code they said it's kind of like listening to someone speak in a foreign language backwards underwater. They could not make sense of it it was bizarre to them they couldn't they spent tons of time trying to break that communication they couldn't do it. When the war ends the success of a desegregated unit,... Is used for the war effort something they take pride in and other place you know other groups within World War II are being overwhelmingly successful proving that minorities not only are not inferior but in some cases they're actually performing at far better levels than any of the white units were so this is starting to change people's mindset "oh they're not as good they're not the B Team" they're the 18 and that's the realization a lot of people are coming to. also,  the African American units especially but really all people who were non-white in uniform, when they went over to Europe the people in Europe did not treat them as black Americans Japanese Americans, they treated them as Americans. everybody was treated the same based on the uniform this is something they had in common with World War I but the numbers were vastly bigger in this war than they were World War I. World War I had a relatively smaller amount of people involved but World War II was very different. We had huge numbers of people in that war and when they come back they come back with pride charity and a little bit more of a global perspective on race and so all of this is setting the stage for a challenge of segregation. They don't have to wait long. 1947 two years after the end of World War II an interesting case Rises up in the federal court system in California specifically. A segregation case. Remember that California segregated People based on language but really this was a smokescreen they really were segregating people of Mexican ancestry away from white students and keeping that that separation and they said it was based on the language they spoke but in this case the court case Mendez V Westminster the Mendez family sent their kids to school but they don't speak Spanish they speak English and they're being excluded from English speaking schools and that was the basis of their fight said hey they're saying we're being segregated based on our language. Doesn't apply here. And yet our kids are still being forced to go to the Spanish-speaking schools. At which point it goes up through the courts up to the Appellate level. now for those of you not familiar with the federal courts and I'm assuming most of you probably aren't the federal court system is on three levels the district level these are the local courts above them is the Appellate level otherwise known as the circuit courts and then at the top the Supreme Court. Now here's how Federal jurisprudence Works in other words court cases that go through the system if a court case is decided at the district level that ruling only applies to the district that they're in. now that doesn't mean other districts can't look at that and use it as a reason for deciding things the same way. often they do but it's only binding in the district that that opinion is given however it gets appealed and it goes up to the Circuit level and once up to the Circuit level, there are three circuits in the United States. Okay? The circuit opinion applies to all the districts within their circuit but it doesn't apply to the other two. In order for it to apply to everyone it goes up to the Supreme Court. This case only went up to the Circuit Court. And the people who did not like the ruling nonetheless were afraid of trying to appeal up to the Supreme Court. And the reason they were afraid is it was a segregation case. They didn't want to automatically have it apply to other circuits and here's the problem. This circuit was West Coast. It was not the same circuit as the Deep South. if it went up to the supreme court, it could be spread out to everyone. It was done in California. And in California the governor of California his name was Earl Warren, he did not like segregation. he didn't like the segregated schools but he didn't have the political clout and the people on his side in order to get rid of it. So, when Mendez is handed down and the court case Appeals and doesn't make Supreme Court it applies to the Circuit he says well it's clear that it's gone through the circuit it's not going up to the Supreme Court so this is law California is desegregating nothing I can do about it bye and he instantly he desegregates no resistance at all he wanted that case to stand. I mentioned him because he becomes important very soon. So this case came down in 47. Around this time Jackie Robinson also joins the Dodgers in 47. The cracks in the dams are starting and it's getting ready to break. And we being the voice the head of the end of the ACT smells blood in the water he says now's our time. We've got to go after segregation hard now we're primed and ready for it. But in order to do that effectively he needed the right guy at the helm. He needed a shark of a lawyer he needed somebody who is brilliant somebody who is gifted and he found it. The man's name was Thurgood Marshall. T. Marshall is very significant in a lot of ways one thing he's significant in he has argued more court cases in front of the Supreme Court than any other lawyer in history: 32. And he's won more than anybody else has 29. 29 out of 32 cases that he argued he won that is one amazing success rate and it's testimony just how good he was also he will go on to become the first African American to sit on the Supreme Court he will be appointed in 1967 so clearly he is destined for big things. now when Thurgood Marshall is brought in, he looks at things and how they're going down he says okay. This Mendez case that was argued out there in the West Coast. This is given us a road map. Education is the key we need to focus on education that's how we beat segregation and he says let's hit the Supreme Court where it hurts. Where every one of them can relate. A law school case. That's what they're looking for and they find it. In 1950 a case Rises up to the Supreme Court that Marshall champions: sweatt bee painter sweaters s w e a t t sweat. Herman was a very gifted student who applied to law school at the University of Texas and the University of Texas law school sent him a reply saying  "sorry we don't accept colored students at the University of Texas law school" this was a law school you think they'd be smarter than that. A lot of the lawyers in the school suddenly said you said what to him no no send back a letter change that you got it you got to fix this this is violation of blessing we will get hammered for this send back another letter correcting it and so the University of Texas sends out a new list saying sorry the previous letter that you received was an error congratulations you are now admitted to the University of Texas School of Law. And now they're going okay great now we have one black student how are we going to come up with a separate but equal program to educate him? Okay now at this point, I want to clarify something. All law schools are not created equal. and all lawyers know this. Define them by tier Tier 1 schools are the ones at the top tier 2 very good schools. So tier one is like the top 25 tier two 26 to 50 and they continue down here three to four to five to six and the higher rank you have the better job you are going to get when you get out so ranking matters. And what are the two factors that law schools look at for ranking? Faculty +  Law Library. Those are the two big factors in what go into the rank. If you have a good faculty and a good Law Library it produces good lawyers that's the idea. That's why the oldest of the law schools are the ones that typically still are the highest ranked. Harvard, Yale, etc. they've been around a very long time okay. Sweattshows up and he's told well when you go to class you actually have to sit in the desk outside the class. Listen through the door you have access to the class but you're out here and they're in there so he does and he tries to engage the professors after the class of before class they won't even talk to him they walled him off.  He wants to go and study in the library and he's told no you can't go in there that's a segregated Library. So you have to go use the library downtown. They have a law library downtown you have access to it so go use that one. well, what are the two things that determine the rank? Faculty he has no access to his faculty there's stonewalling him. My library? he's banned from his he has to go use the one downtown which is nowhere near as good as the University of Texas law life. and they're able to make a point hey he's clearly being separated but he's not being treated equal. And ultimately the Supreme Court agrees with sweatt but this is a sort of a mixed victory. All they really say is yes sweat has a case he's absolutely right but the problem isn't the Plessy ruling the problem is the Texas University was not adhering to the Plessy rule they did not give him equal facility the way they were supposed to and that was the problem. So mixed bag they kind of went well we expected more from that. How do we attack this now? And there was a case coming out of Kansas. It was an elementary school case and this one intrigued Marshall he said "you know what let's change tactics rather than going after the higher ed stuff let's go after kids when they're in their formative years and try to argue that these kids are being screwed up by segregation that is damaging to them and it's causing a permanent problem for the rest of their life of an inferiority complex. let's argue that instead." so they took this case Brown be Board of Education until Topeka Kansas all the way up to the Supreme Court the Supreme Court hurt the case in 1953. The problem is shortly after the case was heard, not just any justice, the Chief Justice died. Which means they had to come up with a new chief justice and the president gets to select who they are in this particular case. A new Justice was selected and his name was Earl Warren. Now, Warren what is his belief about segregation? Does he like it? no.  Now before the death of the Chief Justice the Supreme Court had been close on the vote but 54 in favor of segregation and maintaining Plessy. but now with Earl Warren replacing one of those boats it swings to fight for the other direction so now the court is poised to overturn Plessy for the first time. When Earl Warren comes in and takes over.  And then he's looking through and he pulls out this Brown B.  Board of Education case he says Brown B.  Board of Education call him back in I want to hear this one argued in person the other justices are going oh no. And so they call him back in Marshall's the case in front of the Supreme Court. And this time, a 54 decision is handed down and it's in favor of brown. The words they use are "separate is inherently unequal". They overturn Plessy. What they say is they make a good case that kids are being stigmatized from a young age that they are different therefore lesser than white kids. And that is damaging them for the rest of their lives that is not equal. Now people are saying, well okay does this only apply to education or is this all segregations being struck down I mean did they just up and plus he completely or is it just related to education people are asking that question they don't know and throughout the South they are in a panic. Their entire way of life for the last half of century is being uprooted all over again just like the Civil War uprooted their culture before now it's doing it again. And politicians across the South come together in a big conference all levels of government are in there Senators Congressman, governors, School Board commissioner, mayors, County Supervisors you name it every level of politician is there and they all say okay we have to commit to the people of the South that we are going to fight any effort to desegregate anything. We have to make a pledge and they do they call it the southern Manifesto and all of them put their signature on. They all sign it committing that they will fight desegregation George Wallace mayors Alabama was ordered by the courts to desegregate and two African Americans were admitted to the University of Alabama and we're showing up the register God by the name of James hood and a woman named by Vivian Malone and George Wallace is symbolically standing in the doorway now this is just a symbolic history. He's being seen doing something the only thing he can do but the fact is the FBI and National Guard are already out in force and they know he's going to be moved to side he knows this and he does not resist but he's doing everything he can he's fulfilling his promise. He tries to keep Alabama from being desegregated and he fails and so the first two African Americans are enrolled in the University of Alabama. He stood up to him but he lost. Now George Wallace will later run for president he gets shot when he is in the hospital he receives a very interesting visitor her name is Shirley Chisholm she is the first African American woman ever elected to congress she's also in your readings. And George Wallace actually formed a friendship that lasts the rest of their lives. Largely because of his relationship and probably also by the fact that he got shot he comes to revise his thinking seeing that maybe, his ideas on segregation were bad that he was in the wrong and He suggests that he seen the light send to prevent desegregation efforts from that point on. So he apparently switched sides now whether he did it just as a political maneuver or if he meant it I personally think he meant it because and that friendship that he makes with Shirley Chisholm certainly had a big impact with it so however you come down on it he did publicly come out against segregation by the end. 

## George Wallace

okay now do you guys recognize this scene. from Forrest Gump. Okay this was the scene where he was kind of looking over his shoulder and then the the black woman dropped the book and he ran over and said you drop this man.and give it back to her well that was supposed to be Vivian Malone enrolling okay so this was part of the scenes that they altered a little bit so nobody really knows where plus he stops and brown starts they don't know if it's just education or if it's everything.
