# Announcements
## MAPS (Mathematics Attitudes and Perceptions Survey) [^1]
**MAPS (Mathematics Attitudes and Perceptions Survey)**  
  
As members of this class, you are asked to participate in a survey to evaluate attitudes towards Math. This survey should take no more than 10 minutes to complete. Your answers will not affect your grade in this or any course; however, thinking about your attitudes towards math could have positive impacts on how you approach learning in this course. In addition, your instructors may learn more about how to improve Math education at CSUSB and beyond, and you may indirectly benefit from this knowledge.  
  
I will be giving 10 minutes during class tomorrow for you to complete this survey, but feel free to do it ahead of time should you feel inclined to do so. The link is below. Remember, you must be simultaneously signed in to your student email to gain access to the survey.  
  
[https://forms.gle/GGJv2urvFdGytFWL6 (Links to an external site.)](https://forms.gle/GGJv2urvFdGytFWL6)  
  
Thank you, I hope to see you all in class tomorrow.  
  
  
Prof. Reid

## 2210 Algebra Gateway Now Open
Hello everyone,  
  
This is just a reminder that the 2210 Algebra Gateway is now open.  I encourage you all to practice at home and then come to the Gateway Lab on campus to take the proctored gateway to earn your algebra mastery.

**Location:** JB 382 (or in a few instances when that is unavailable, JB 390 across the hall from JB 382.  Signs will direct you if this is the case from 382 to 390) 

**Dates of Operation:**

Aug. 29 - Sept 2   +   Sept 6 - Sept 9

Note: The Gateway Lab is closed on Labor Day, next Monday

**Hours of Operation:**  Currently 

Monday Through Friday - 9am to 5pm

We are working to add Wednesday evenings, any updates will be shared with you as soon as I am informed.

**Frequency.**  You can keep taking the Gateway during hours of operation until you pass.  If you do not pass, I highly recommend that you walk across the hall to the Math Gym to go over what you missed.

**What can students use?**  Only pen(cil) and paper. No calculators.  
  

Please let me know if you have any questions and I will do my best to assist you.

Thank you all very much.  
  
  
Prof. Reid

# Notes
`1.7 Intro to limits`
`1.8 Extending the idea of a limit`
`1.9 Further limit calculations`

## gateway algebra topic algebraic fractions[^2]
###### Q1[^3] (1 point) Multiply and simplify. Assume any factors you cancel are not zero.
$$question:\frac{ab+b}{2b^2+18b}*\frac{9a^2+18a}{a+a^2}$$
$$\downarrow$$
$$\frac{b(a+1)}{2b(b+9)}*\frac{9a(a+2a)}{a(1+a)},a\ne0,b\ne0$$
$$\downarrow$$
$$\frac{a+1}{2(b+9)}*\frac{9(a+2a)}{1+a},a\ne-1$$
$$\downarrow$$
$$answer:\frac{9(a+2)}{2(b+9)},b\ne-9$$
## Section 1.4 [^4]
###### Q1[^5](2 points) Simplify the expression, as shown.
$$2e^{9\ln a}=?a^{(?)}$$
$$2e^{(\log_{e}a)9}$$
note: $e^{\ln a}=e^{\log_{e}a}=a$
$$2a^{9}$$
###### Q2 (2 points) Solve the equation for $x$ using logs.
$$13=35(1.1)^x$$
$$13/35=(1.1)^x$$
$$\log{\frac{13}{35}}=x\log{1.1}$$
$$\frac{\log{\frac{13}{35}}}{\log{1.1}}=x$$
note:
$$y=2^x$$
$$\log y=\log 2^x$$
$$\log y=x\log 2$$
$$\frac{\log y}{\log 2}=x$$





[^1]: https://csusb.instructure.com/courses/13866/discussion_topics/173902
[^2]: https://webwork.csusb.edu/webwork2/MATH-2210-12-FALL-2022/
[^3]: https://webwork.csusb.edu/webwork2/MATH-2210-12-FALL-2022/gateway_algebra_topic_algebraic_fractions/1/?key=jtwKQfribXrmnuEaEFwUSAJ1pYkbqYRB&user=007655642&effectiveUser=007655642 
[^4]: https://webwork.csusb.edu/webwork2/MATH-2210-12-FALL-2022/Section_1.4?user=007655642&effectiveUser=007655642&key=jtwKQfribXrmnuEaEFwUSAJ1pYkbqYRB
[^5]: https://webwork.csusb.edu/webwork2/MATH-2210-12-FALL-2022/Section_1.4/1/?user=007655642&key=jtwKQfribXrmnuEaEFwUSAJ1pYkbqYRB&effectiveUser=007655642